README.md, before:

# docker-dovecot
lightweight alpine based dockerized dovecot, exim, rspamd environment

In order to achieve scalabality the setup will be split accross 3 servers:

    1 MX server, where most of the security features sit (exim-external)
    1 SMTP relay, to allow users to send mails to the outside world (exim-internal)
    1 Mailstore dovecot server, where the mailbox sits (imap)
    1 RSPAM server. Also hosts clamav. If needed, you can add other, better virus scanners here.
    1 redis server (for rspam and others)

We expect users to login via their complete email address. Two conditions must be met:
- must be memberOf the specified LDAP_group that entitles him to use mail at allowed
- the user must be found by either the mail address or an gosaMailAlternateAddress (fusiondirectory specific, you might use other tokens)

## standard config Files
see the directory install/
some of the files will be modified using below ARGS or values in .env

## Ports

| service | Port in container| comments |
| -------------- | ---------: | --------|
| imap         | 1143  | 143 in docker-compose |
| lmtp in      | 2525  | only internal, from mail srv |
| imaps        | 1993  | 993 in docker-compose |
| managesieve  | 4190  | 4190 in compose |
| exim-external  | 1025  | 25 in compose |
| exim-external  | 1587  | 587 in compose |

## addresses
These are the addresses used in the services network. They shouldn't be seen elsewhere. We define them in the .env file.
| address | host| name in .env |
| -------------- | ---------: | --------|
| 172.20.0.4 | redis  | REDIS_IP |
| 172.20.0.5 | imap  | IMAP_IP |
| 172.20.0.3 | exim-external | EXIM_EXTERNAL_IP |

## volumes
for persistent data
| volume | mountpoint| comments |
| -------------- | ---------: | --------|
| /data/$DOMAIN/vmail | /var/vmail  | imap, rw |
| /data/$DOMAIN/redis | /var/vmail  | imap, rw |

## ssl
see the secrets section of docker-compose.yaml.
## logging
we log to /dev/stderr.

## Passwords and users in .env file
| placeholder | container| comments |
| -------------- | ---------: | --------|
| REDIS_PASSWORD | redis, rspam | access to REDIS via this password |
| LDAP_PASSWORD | dovecot, exim  | admin readonly access to ldap |

## build time parameters
as always, documentation lags behind. Ask questions, answers will be here.

## runtime parameters
### LDAP
We expect a TLS connection to your ldap hosts.
Set these values in your .env file. Watch up that you escape the \& with \\& until we find a better way to replace the parameters than using sed
| Parameter | sample | comments |
| -------------- | --------- | --------|
| LDAP_HOSTS | ldap1 ldap2 ldap3 | Space separated list of LDAP hosts to use. host:port is allowed too. |
| LDAP_PASSWORD  | topsecret | |
| LDAP_USER | cn=somebody,dc=yourDomain,dc=de |  |
| LDAP_BASE | ``ou=People,dc=yourDomain,dc=de`` |  |
| LDAP_USER_FILTER, LDAP_PASS_FILTER, LDAP_ITERATE_FILTER| use your convenient LDAP filters here | technically select approved users by LDAP entities |
| LDAP_IP  | 10.100.1.23 | IP address of your LDAP server |
| DOMAIN  | faudin | the domain part of your hosts. will be composed as imap.$DOMAIN.de, smtp.$DOMAIN.de. Adjust your DNS. |


## build side notes
### exim
for exim, see http://exim.org/exim-html-current/doc/html/spec_html/ch-building_and_installing_exim.html and https://registry.hub.docker.com/r/itherz/exim4/dockerfile
all build parameters are set in the Local/makefile
see also https://www.howtoforge.com/setting-up-a-mail-server-using-exim4-clamav-dovecot-spamassassin-and-many-more-on-debian-p2
#### exim makefile
dbm  = gdbm, see Local/makefile
SPOOL_DIRECTORY=/var/spool/exim; this is not persistent
Watch out for entrypoint.sh - this one builds the exim config.

## testing
see https://wiki.dovecot.org/TestInstallation

Commit message:

add first version of exim.conf

README.md, after:

# docker-dovecot
lightweight alpine based dockerized dovecot, exim, rspamd environment

In order to achieve scalabality the setup will be split accross 3 servers:

    1 MX server, where most of the security features sit (exim-external)
    1 SMTP relay, to allow users to send mails to the outside world (exim-internal)
    1 Mailstore dovecot server, where the mailbox sits (imap)
    1 RSPAM server. Also hosts clamav. If needed, you can add other, better virus scanners here.
    1 redis server (for rspam and others)

We expect users to login via their complete email address. Two conditions must be met:
- must be memberOf the specified LDAP_group that entitles him to use mail at allowed
- the user must be found by either the mail address or an gosaMailAlternateAddress (fusiondirectory specific, you might use other tokens)

## standard config Files
see the directory install/
some of the files will be modified using below ARGS or values in .env

## Ports

| service | Port in container| comments |
| -------------- | ---------: | --------|
| imap         | 1143  | 143 in docker-compose |
| lmtp in      | 2525  | only internal, from mail srv |
| imaps        | 1993  | 993 in docker-compose |
| managesieve  | 4190  | 4190 in compose |
| exim-external  | 1025  | 25 in compose |
| exim-external  | 1587  | 587 in compose |
| exim-external  | 1465  | 465 in compose (tls on connect) |

## addresses
These are the addresses used in the services network. They shouldn't be seen elsewhere. We define them in the .env file.
| address | host| name in .env |
| -------------- | ---------: | --------|
| 172.20.0.4 | redis  | REDIS_IP |
| 172.20.0.5 | imap  | IMAP_IP |
| 172.20.0.3 | exim-external | EXIM_EXTERNAL_IP |

## volumes
for persistent data
| volume | mountpoint| comments |
| -------------- | ---------: | --------|
| /data/$DOMAIN/vmail | /var/vmail  | imap, rw |
| /data/$DOMAIN/redis | /var/vmail  | imap, rw |

## ssl
see the secrets section of docker-compose.yaml.
## logging
we log to /dev/stderr.

## Passwords and users in .env file
| placeholder | container| comments |
| -------------- | ---------: | --------|
| REDIS_PASSWORD | redis, rspam | access to REDIS via this password |
| LDAP_PASSWORD | dovecot, exim  | admin readonly access to ldap |

## build time parameters
as always, documentation lags behind. Ask questions, answers will be here.

## runtime parameters
### LDAP
We expect a TLS connection to your ldap hosts.
Set these values in your .env file. Watch up that you escape the \& with \\& until we find a better way to replace the parameters than using sed
| Parameter | sample | comments |
| -------------- | --------- | --------|
| LDAP_HOSTS | ldap1 ldap2 ldap3 | Space separated list of LDAP hosts to use. host:port is allowed too. |
| LDAP_PASSWORD  | topsecret | |
| LDAP_USER | cn=somebody,dc=yourDomain,dc=de |  |
| LDAP_BASE | ``ou=People,dc=yourDomain,dc=de`` |  |
| LDAP_USER_FILTER, LDAP_PASS_FILTER, LDAP_ITERATE_FILTER| use your convenient LDAP filters here | technically select approved users by LDAP entities |
| LDAP_IP  | 10.100.1.23 | IP address of your LDAP server |
| DOMAIN  | faudin | the domain part of your hosts. will be composed as imap.$DOMAIN.de, smtp.$DOMAIN.de. Adjust your DNS. |


## build side notes
### exim
for exim, see http://exim.org/exim-html-current/doc/html/spec_html/ch-building_and_installing_exim.html and https://registry.hub.docker.com/r/itherz/exim4/dockerfile
all build parameters are set in the Local/makefile
see also https://www.howtoforge.com/setting-up-a-mail-server-using-exim4-clamav-dovecot-spamassassin-and-many-more-on-debian-p2
#### exim makefile
dbm  = gdbm, see Local/makefile
SPOOL_DIRECTORY=/var/spool/exim; this is not persistent
Watch out for entrypoint.sh - this one builds the exim config.
logging goes to the (mounted? ) directory /var/log/exim/. The exicyclog script isn't run by default; you have to set up a cron job for it if you want it.

## testing
see https://wiki.dovecot.org/TestInstallation
